Let's look at unit testing REST APIs using JUnit, Mockito, and Spring Test,
also known as MockMvc.
Writing unit tests using JUnit allows you to test
individual units of source code.
JUnit is by far the most popular unit testing framework.
Mockito is a great mocking framework,
which we'll use to provide data to our unit tests.
Spring also has the @MockBean annotation,
which works well with the Mockito library. @WebMvcTest is an
annotation used for controller layer unit testing and is often used
to test one controller class at a time, and works in combination
with Mockito to mock the dependencies. @WebMvcTest scans only the
controllers, so @Controllers, including @RestControllers,
and will not load the full application context.
In our case study, only the TzaController will be scanned. If
your controller has dependencies on other beans,
for example, a bean from the service layer,
as in our case,
the test will not run until you either load the bean
yourself or provide a mock for it.
Typically,
you will need to provide the beans manually by mocking those
objects. @WebMvcTest speeds up testing by only loading a small
portion of your app for unit testing.
In this case, just the controller layer.
Let's see unit testing in action.
Let's look at unit testing.
I've opened the project and I've navigated to the test package
and I'm opening the TzaControllerUnitTest.
So let's take a look at this.
Start at the very top. Here on line 29, I'm using this @RunWith annotation.
This defines the runner class to be used to run test cases.
In this case,
SpringRunner is the choice since I'm using Spring to build the
application. On line 30, I'm using the @WebMvcTest annotation,
and this uses the class of the controller that I'm testing.
In this case, this is a unit test for the TzaController.
This will start the web application context,
and the embedded servlet container is not used, keeping testing
lightweight. Here on line 33, I'm using mockMvc. MockMvc is a
powerful way to quickly test MVC controllers without needing to
start a full HTTP server.
It also helps with processing HTTP responses by providing
methods for what we call expectations,
and we'll look at expectations in a moment.
On lines 36 and on 39, I'm mocking the Application and the TicketService beans.
The @MockBean annotation creates a Mockito mock of the services,
which are dependencies for the TzaController.
Now let's look at our first unit test. It's here on line 42.
It's a method called getAllApplications, and notice I've
used the @Test annotation here on line 41.
So let's see what this method is doing. Here on line 43, I'm
calling the perform method of mockMvc,
and this method simply simulates making an HTTP request to a REST
controller. So it's going to call out to /tza/applications.
Here on lines 44, 45, and 46, we are using this andExpect method.
So this allows us to set expectations on the HTTP
response received back from the controller.
So in this case,
we're saying I expect the status to be OK, I expect the content type
to be application JSON, I expect the content to be JSON. Down here on
line 48, I'm using the verify method.
This verify method is used to verify the number of
times a mock method has been called.
So in this case, I'm ensuring that listApplications has only been called once.
So that's our test for the getAllApplications
functionality of the TzaController.
Let's run the test by clicking this arrow.
I'll give it a minute,
but I should see a green checkmark saying that the test executed successfully.
Yes, and one test passed.
Now let's take a look at the second unit test.
So this is testing the getAllTickets method for our TzaController,
and it uses the same format except that it calls out to /tza/tickets.
It has the same expectations as before,
and I'm verifying that the listTickets method is only called once.
Let's execute this,
and we should see a green arrow in a moment,
indicating that the test was successful.
And there we go, one test passed. That was a look at adding unit tests to your Spring Boot application.